# The printf() C library function

Using the Arm C complier, it is mandatory to link your application with the standard C library, even you do not directly use C library functions. This is because the compiler might impleicitly generate calls to C library functions.
The standard C library consists of:
- All functions defined by the ISO C99 library standard.
- Target-dependent functions that implement the C library functions in the semihosted execution environment. You can redefine these functions in your own application.
- Functions called implicitly by the compiler.
- Arm extensions that are not defined by the ISO C library standard, but are included in the library.

One of the most commonly used C library function is the `printf()` function which allows to write text to the "standard output" (normally a monitor or line printer). In embedded systems, often a UART is used. In Arm Cortex-N based systems you can redirect the standard output to the ITM debug channel which saves resourecs (the UART) and is much faster. In µVision, you can use the "Debug printf() Viewer" window to observe `printf()` messages delivered via ITM.

### How to use printf()

```c
printf(ControlString, arg1, ..., argn);
```
Everything within the `ControlString` is printed verbatim except `%d`'s
which are replaced by the argument values from the list.

**Code example**
```c
int n = 1, m = 7;
printf("n = %d\nm = %d\n", n, m);
```
The output is:
```c
n = 1
m = 7
```
*Note*
The character `%d` is the *conversion character*.

### Conversion characters for the ControlString

| Conversion character | Description |
|---:|---|
| %c | Single character
| %s | String (all characters until `\0`)
| %d | Signed decimal integer
| %# | A `0x` should precede a hexadecimal number
| %u | Unsigned decimal integer
| %x | Unsigned hexadecimal integer with lowercase digits (`1a4e`)
| %X | As x, but with uppercase digits (`1A4E`)
| %f | Signed decimal value (floating point)
| %e | Signed decimal with exponent (`1.13e-4`)
| %E | As e, but uses E for exponent (`1.13E-4`)
| %g | As e or f, but depends on size and precision of value
| %G | As g, but uses E for exponent



