# Functions

What are functions?

> Functions are self contained program segments designed to perform a specific task. They take inputs, do some computation, and produce output. 

- All C programs have one or more functions
- The `main()` function is required
- Functions can accept parameters from the code that calls them
- Functions usually return a single value
- Functions help to organize a program into logical, manageable segments

**Syntax**
```c
type identifier (type1 arg1, type2 arg2, ..., typen argn) {
    declarations        // body
    statements          // body
    return expression;  // body
}
```

Where:
- `type` is the data type of the return expression.
- `identifier` is the name of the function.
- `type1 arg1, type2 arg2, ..., typen argn` is the parameter list which is optional.
- `expression` is the (optional) return value.
- the body is also optional. 

## Return data type

- A function's `type` must match the type of data in the return `expression`
- A function may have multiple return statements (of the same type), but only one will be executed
- The function type is `void` if the `return` statement has no `expression` or is not present at all. This is also known as a procedure function, since nothing is returned.

## Parameters

- A function's parameters are declared just like ordinary variables, but in a comma separated list inside the parentheses
- The parameter names are only valid inside the function (local to the function)
- The list may mix different data types
- Parameters of the same type must be declared separately (as separation using commas will not work here)
- If no parameters are required, use the keyword `void` in place of the parameter list when defining the function